except I will be interviewing venture
capitalist and former Facebook executive
Jamaat Palio Fatiha
welcome thank you you uh you just got
off a plane I forgot who here with
Gurley after the playoff game yesterday
yeah
don't worry you own the word I mean
you're an owner of the warrior the word
yeah it's an unbelievable I mean like
for a city that's like had the 49ers
crushing it the Giants crushing it and
then for us to have gone through a bunch
of turbulent years with that team it's
something but it's unbelievable that
that stadium is just electric it's
amazing um I want to spend some time
talking about social capital the venture
firm that you founded but but first
before that I want to take some time to
learn about you because I think you
you've been called by many the
unconventional VC you've taken some
unconventional paths in your career what
makes you unconventional I'm well I
think it's hard to be that as a
purposeful thing I just have my own
specific path so the very short version
is parents emigrated to escape a civil
war grew up in Canada was technically
educated and then just kind of became a
bit of a sell out for a little while
traded derivatives a sell out meaning
well meaning right you know I was I was
just really poor and you know they
offered me a job and it was a lot of
money and so I took it and within a year
I was like you know like people in
banking and finance or like smart enough
to be greedy but not really smart enough
to be useful you know and these people
are just kind of stupid and I was just
like this isn't just a bunch of paper
chasing and so I quit and the best thing
that ever happened to me was I applied
for a bunch of different jobs and I got
a job at a company called Wynn app which
made a media player in the late 90s
early 2000s bought by AOL and early 2000
and that was like the Keystone because
it's like I walked into a place which
was six kids literally twenty-two years
or younger nobody knew what they were
doing and they were just building really
cool
consumer software I learned about
platforms back in 99 and 2000 when
nobody was talking about consumer
platforms and the most important thing
was we built a bunch of distributed
social software and the most insidious /
important thing that we did was we built
this open-source project called Nutella
which became the you know the sort of
like the the key ingredient in bearshare
LimeWire Kazaa all that stuff and
destroyed the music business and so you
know when you're you're in your early
20s and you're like holy mackerel
the key is you build for people you kind
of try to destroy these you know
hierarchically define senses of power
and if you do it you get rewarded and so
that's kind of been sort of that mantra
and every time I didn't listen to that
intuition I made a mistake so in 2005 I
was running a man ICQ AOL Sean Parker
comes to me and says Timothy you have to
join this company and I waited a year
and that year literally cost me a
bajillion dollars and the reason was
because I got a job offer from Mayfield
and I was like wow this is amazing
traditionally defined venture capital
firm I can be a junior partner and you
know I spent a year basically
dry-humping failure until I was like
this is the dumbest thing in the world I
got to go join Facebook and so every
time I kind of listened to that gut it
kind of worked out and so the firm is
basically with this premise that it's
about deconstructing these extremely
calcified senses of power like society
as we define it right now is I think
breaking at the seams and all of us who
just live a life of total frustration
and it's because none of us trust the
things that we were supposed to trust to
help make the world a better more useful
interesting place and so the best thing
that we should be doing is spending our
money and our time to basically destroy
that and to rebuild things in a much
more equitably interesting way yeah so
I'm curious you've mentioned you've
talked about innovation in Silicon
Valley and basically that there's not a
lot of it we see a little bit more I
think we should be utterly ashamed right
now we are to like a an absolute minimum
in terms of the quality of things that
are being started and the reason is
because you know 40 years ago there's a
bunch of guys standing around some apple
orchard with some sand in their hand
and they're like hey you know what if we
bake this at high temperature
we'll make this into silicon we'll make
transistors we'll build computers and
then a couple you know decades after
that someone says hey you know what
let's just put computers on every
desktop and then after that people are
like hey you know what let's wire the
world
hey let's light up everybody in the
world and now you know the quality of it
has just degraded to a point where it's
it's like people are running around
rehashing ideas from 2003 and it's like
people are coming to me like you know I
have this really great instant messaging
app you know you can take pictures and
you know it can be everything from an
apple orchard to you know your own
genitalia and oh by the way it's got
this great feature where it goes away
after four seconds and I look at the
memo like okay this business in 2003 it
was a stupid business then it's not a
business now and then somebody else
comes in pitches me and says well you
know what I actually allow you to
annotate and draw on top of those
pictures and I'm just like I mean this
is ridiculous you know it's like people
are dying left and right you know people
are frustrated with all of this in
opportunity and inequity and then now
there's actually legislative change and
all this other change which is
reallocating trillions of dollars which
to me says everyone should be focused on
those big ideas so tell me about those
ideas because one of them one of the
ideas that you've you know centralized
social capital around in terms of an
investment thesis though you say there
is no investment thesis but you've done
a lot of healthcare investments and I'm
curious you know why healthcare and and
also how do you know without healthcare
experience in your past how do you know
what to invest in the reason why
healthcare is interesting right now is
because every single person in this room
has a reason to care okay it's kind of
the same reason why at Facebook when we
define the problem all of a sudden we
realized wow the product that we're
building is applicable to everybody
there's nobody in this room plus or
minus who doesn't want to live as long
as possible there's nobody in this room
that doesn't want their kids their wives
their sisters their mothers their
brothers their fathers to live as long
as they can and what's interesting is we
lived up until Obamacare at least in the
United States in a regulatory framework
that was really structured in a way that
prevented startups from being successful
and so as a result you plow through
hundreds
millions if not billions of dollars and
there's just littered with failure and
so what we did was we said okay while
Obamacare could be an interesting change
and so the first thing we did was we
actually just read it you know and
what's crazy is like you know this is
what frustrates me sometimes is like
there's so many shortcuts so many me to
copying if you actually took the time to
read that document or go to the
Brookings Institute and talk to the
folks that actually wrote the
legislation what you realize is there's
like five trillion dollars trillion with
the T is going to rain from the skies
over the next ten years and if you
actually are prepared you can take
advantage of it so what we did was we
basically had a thesis we did a bunch of
work we surveyed we talked to every
single company and we waited for one key
thing which was the Supreme Court
decision to either reverse it or to
uphold Obamacare and the minute that we
saw that that happened we literally
plowed almost 100 million dollars into a
bunch of different companies not all in
one shot but systematically over how
long was that I mean over like the last
year right and still a lot it's a short
amount of time to put a lot of money
into a vector now in fairness some of
these companies over started it's not
like everyone was started you know right
after Obamacare was upheld some of them
in and been around for years some months
some weeks some hadn't been around and
we incubated them but the point was
we're like there is real value there
real value for people real value for you
as a entrepreneur to build a business
and more importantly you can work on
really cool stuff so if you fail you can
say I tried this big thing and it's to
me at least much more interesting to say
you failed trying something crazy and
huge than something incremental and just
frankly you know the fourth order
derivative of something that was done
ten years ago so Mayo is one of your LPS
yeah and how did that happen I mean did
they approach you or you approach them
so I but I mean when I was at Facebook I
was investing a lot as an angel and even
before that sort of I learned to trade
and invest very early and I was always
very good managing my own private
account and so in facebook when I got a
little liquidity I became an angel
investor and I got really lucky I
invested in a company in 2008 called
played him we sold it to Disney for
three-quarters of a billion dollars we
got a ton of money and so I said oh I'm
just going to
spend it all I'm gonna basically find as
many cool startups and put every single
one of these dollars to work so I was
investing it all and doing really well
and so I had met all these interesting
people and so I said to myself okay when
I set up this fund what I'm not
concerned about is making money so like
last year you know I think we
participated in about two billion
dollars liquidity this is a two year old
fund so everything's fine you know what
I'm saying and so but I wanted to make
money for people that I thought were
interesting and good I didn't want to
make money for some other random person
some endowments some pension fund some
university that isn't doing anything
good with the money you know what's the
point of giving Harvard and Stanford
another couple hundred million dollars
so they can buy another building you
know yet there's people with trillions
you know trillion dollars of student
debt or to a foundation that is going to
do anything interesting so I basically
found individuals where I felt
comfortable that if I make money for
them they will do something that
benefits all of us and that's better for
me because I myself am NOT a great
person to allocate that into charity or
other things that's just not what I'm
good at
so Mayo is basically this I mean look
heaven forbid you ever have to go there
but this is a quadrant area care
facility what that means is when you go
to a hospital and they don't know they
send you to a Regional Hospital when
they don't know they send you to like
the best sort of like teaching hospital
when they don't know they send you to
Mayo it is the last stand and these guys
are a nonprofit that just saves people's
lives and so for me it's just like an
amazing thing where we made them a bunch
of money
I was visiting them like a few weeks
later and they're like you know what
that money pays for the refurbishment of
this cancer wing and I'm like you know
what that's awesome I hope I make them
billions of dollars over the next few
years I want to go back to the question
about the domain expertise how are you
hey how are you finding these healthcare
startups what are some of the ones that
you be on definitely we did not stick
out a shingle that said we invest in
healthcare we try to tell folks and
mostly it's just our network find me the
craziest thing you can find me the
entrepreneur that's the most frustrated
right now with an inability to raise
capital because they're not there so you
know they're not saying what other
people want to hear send that person to
our doors and that's what we did and
what happens
when you do the first few key
interesting investments along that
premise those people tell their friends
who also tend to be these crazy
eccentric kind of blighted people
because they don't represent the
canonical sense of what is a great
venture investment anymore in Silicon
Valley and it kind of just perpetuates
and to be honest with you I think it's
better that we don't know anything about
these spaces we learn with them which
means that we're more inclined to take
the kind of disproportionate risk that
traditional folks won't take so a simple
example you know a guy that I work with
one of the three engineering directors
of Facebook says Tim each month I have
these three extremely frustrated guys
that I went to school with the Cal Tech
they can't raise money from anybody I
mean anybody they walked up and down
Sand Hill and when I met them you know
I've talked about this company before
they're trying to build a mass
spectrometer using a CMOS sensor okay
awesome
it's technology this is hard right this
is about bending the laws of physics in
our favor it helps everybody and you
know for me to be able to give them
three or five million dollars to get
them going and now I've given another 10
million bucks that's the kind of stuff
that matters and those guys no other
really great crazy smart people and so
it kind of just built on top of itself I
want to talk about a for us you teamed
up with Mark Zuckerberg and many others
to found this political advocacy group
designed to promote policies that keep
the American workforce competitive
what's the backstory behind that you
know how did you guys start I have a
personal backstory which is I've been
now part of to immigration systems I was
a refugee in Canada and then I was a
more traditional knowledge worker
immigrant in the United States and it's
really stressful trying to come here to
do good things to build things and to
create value for America right now you
know I basically was you know I had an
h-1b that I had to renew like umpteen
times I was literally in my last year
before I would have had to leave Canada
when I finally got my green card or
leave the u.s. to go back to Canada and
what's crazy is like I think like I've
done pretty good you know I was like I
paid my taxes a ton of
taxes you know I've created a ton of
jobs I'm spending basically every penny
I've made into investing in the future
and it's hard for me so you can imagine
for other folks how much harder it must
be and the problem is right now the
United States is getting its ass kicked
you know like we all talked about you
know and and no offense to TechCrunch
but it's like you know we spent all this
time anointing these stupid crappy
companies is like the next Apple the
next this the next step
listen the next Apple exists actually
it's called Xiaomei it's in China okay
the next great ecommerce business has
already been created it's called Alibaba
it's also in China last mile delivery
you want to figure out that problem go
to India it's called Flipkart already
solved so I'm just looking around saying
I mean what are we doing we're basically
focusing on like you know these 1%
problems while everybody else is poking
on focusing on these big higher-order
big problems and now this really really
smart people Jack Ma is never going to
come to the United States the next Jack
Ma now has even more incentive to never
even consider coming to the United
States that's bad for us and so for us
is a very simple framework to say we
have to make sure that we continue to
attract the best once you do that then
you can combine that with actually a
process to educate kids and create
incentives we're like you want to be
technical and you celebrate trying to
start things and be an entrepreneur and
that's something right now that's
unfortunately under pressure and if we
don't solve it you're just going to
become like every other country that was
awesome and now is looking in the you
know ahead saying wow look how those
guys passed this and it's happening do
you think that I mean you have to think
that you guys are going to make some
change how but it's hard
in DC I mean it's a totally different
world it's not Silicon Valley how do you
actually make that change happen I mean
it's you know you the group is
absolutely no idea I mean it's great I
mean I literally have no idea I mean I
think the folks that are actually the
people that operationally run that
day-to-day are very sophisticated and
understand the nuances of how to affect
it and so you know the big thing right
now is this immigration bill right which
is both a combined plan for knowledge
workers which
you know I think is really important
obviously for Silicon Valley but also a
path for 11 million undocumented
students about kind of like trying to
cross it's like bipartisan divide I get
these emails every week that kind of
summarizes their progress they're doing
a good job it's a really gnarly gnarly
thing having to deal with Washington and
to be honest with you my perspective was
it's a really good investment because
it's a great way to pay it forward and
I'm really glad that other people other
than me are dealing with it who had the
patience and the resolve to figure it
out let's pretend that after this talk
you're gonna go grab coffee with you
know one of the people in the audience
that's in a situation that you were in
whether it be in 2005 when Sean Parker
came to you or in 2007 when you were at
Mayfield and then you joined Facebook
you know some there in a secured role
but they're looking to do something
different what would your advice be
again what I would say is the one thing
that I've seen in all the investments
that I've made the few companies that
have started the companies that I've
been with is like you have a 1% chance
to being successful in the best case and
you know that's why when you look across
and you're like wait how did that
company win and that company fail
they're both exactly the same well it's
it's almost happenstance right it's just
weird confluence of like luck and timing
and a bunch of other things so if that's
the case and somebody is sitting there
in a point where like you're frustrated
and you're like I want to do something
big then actually do that and actually
go and try something in an area like I
said where there is going to be massive
value reallocation and the two most to
me would at that so in healthcare in
part because of Obamacare but also in
part of so for example there's a really
big case that was argued in front of the
Supreme Court where this company myriad
based in Utah was given a patent to the
breast cancer gene which you know
hopefully you know unfortunately there's
going to be a lot of you in this
audience who knows someone with breast
cancer
this is genetically identifiable bracha
one bracha two it's expressed in your
person but the idea that you have to
basically go through a gatekeeper to
figure that out to me is a pauran and so
we've spent a lot
of money to basically help litigate that
all the way to the Supreme Court get it
overturned so whether it's something
like that where if I think it will get
overturned you'll have an explosion in
the types of businesses around genetic
understanding and you know decoding etc
etc which will create a completely new
pipeline of ways to think about
healthcare or whether it's Obama care
the point is trillions of dollars up for
grabs
just get in there and figure something
out in education in education I think
right now people think it's about MOOCs
or some other stuff it's not about that
it's about the fact that we're in this
really huge secular transition away from
degrees towards skills it no longer
matters where you went to school what
you did don't tell me you have an MBA
it's irrelevant it's useless
who gives a learn to code and
you'll be employed for the rest of your
life
I lost a kid 24-year old kid to a big
company in Cupertino where he got paid
175 grand a year and $600,000 guaranteed
over four years and rsu's and this e's
not done anything ever okay so all of
you should teach your kids how to code
all of you you should learn how to code
but my point is it's about skills now
and so that's another reallocation of
trillions of dollars and then in
financial services you know Chris talked
about it earlier but Bitcoin and things
like it is the equivalent of the red
pill okay
we are entering a completely world of
uncharted water you made any investments
in Vic so I mean I personally I own
Bitcoin in my hedge fund I own Bitcoin
in my fund I own Bitcoin in my private
account it is a huge deal it's a huge
huge huge deal because what you're
talking about right now is for the next
three to five years an unbelievably
better store value it is gold 2.0 right
the value of gold that hedges the world
economy about nine trillion dollars
right 1300 an ounce of which only 100 to
150 dollars is the actual production
value so all the rest of it is imputed
where Lina you and I have decided that
it's worth 1,300 an ounce well guess
what I can do the same thing with
Bitcoin
except now it's I could do it outside
the purview of every single government
it's being used everywhere where you
would think it would be used Russia Iran
Iraq Egypt Venezuela Argentina
everywhere where you have currency
pressure everywhere where you want to
basically shield your assets and then
after that it'll probably become a
payment mechanism so in all of these
three industries you're talking about
trillions of dollars up for grabs up for
grabs right and it's just about trying
something right and taking a few months
to understand what the opportunity is
and then hit the seam and I think that
the cool thing is it's easier to know
how to code it's actually useful in a
way where you know you can probably hack
something together yourself you can find
folks and so this is the time where
people should be trying really big crazy
things that's a great way to end thank
you so much
[Applause]